Add ADR describing reasoning why we build images and security of it (#20407)
mistercrunch/Airflow: dev/breeze/doc/adr/0005-preventing-using-contributed-code-when-building-images.md

- [5. Preventing using contributed code when building images](#5-preventing-using-contributed-code-when-building-images)
  - [Status](#status)
  - [Context](#context)
  - [Decision](#decision)
  - [Consequences](#consequences)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

# 5. Preventing using contributed code when building images

Date: 2021-12-19

## Status

Draft

Builds on [4. Using Docker images as test environment](0004-using-docker-images-as-test-environment.md)

## Context

As described in [4. Using Docker images as test environment](0004-using-docker-images-as-test-environment.md),
Airflow CI system uses CI Docker image as consistent test execution environment. This environment provides
cacheability and rebuild capabilities that allow the image to be rebuilt quickly, incrementally based on
previous version of the images - whenever any of the source code, Python dependencies, System dependencies
are changed (in optimal way depending on the change). However, even with optimalizations, rebuilding
the image might take quite some time (when only sources change ~ 1 minute, but when system dependencies

> change ~ 10 minutes). In certain cases we run (for the same Python version) 20 jobs that require the same

Reviewer: @potiuk could you explain me what jobs mean in this case?

Author: Yep. You can see the jobs in .github/workflows/ci.yml  - and when you create PR you will see the red/green status in 'checks' tab - every such red/green stuff is a job. For example 'tests postres python 3.7' - is an example of a job.

Author: https://docs.github.com/en/actions/learn-github-actions/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions#jobs

in the registry with "commit" tag which allows to easily reproduce the environment used in particular
build on CI. This is a nice side effect of such setup, one that can be useful in case a user does not want
to lose time on checking out and rebuilding the environment locally for a build that comes from their own,
or another developer's PR.

This requires those prerequisites:

  * the images need to be built in a workflow that has "write" access to store the images after they are
    built, so that the images can then be "pulled" by the test jobs rather than rebuilt

  * the process to build the images need to be secured from malicious users that would like to inject a
    code in the build process to make bad use of the "write" access - for example to push the code
    to the repository or to inject malicious code to "common" artifacts used by the jobs

  * however, in order to build the images that reflect the PR of the user, they should be able to modify some
    code that is usually used to build airflow packages (`setup.py`, airflow sources, scripts).

GitHub Actions provide some features that we can use for that purpose:

> * there isa "pull request target" workflow that uses only the code present in the protected "main" version

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* there is a "pull request target" workflow that uses only the code present in the protected "main" version
```

* when using 3rd-party actions, you need to "pin" the actions to specific COMMIT SHA versions because
  there is a risk, a 3rd-party might inject a code to your workflow by releasing and tagging new version
  of their actions: https://docs.github.com/en/actions/security-guides/security-hardening-for-github-actions

* some code that should be executed "inside" of the images when building should be possible to come from the
  PR - for example code that is used inside the docker image to install mysql or postgres should be possible
  to be changed in the PR - as long as we make sure the code is executed inside the Docker image or Docker
  build process.

Those protections are gradually strengthened (up until recently there was no granular access rights possible)
however we decided to add certain rules of the "build" code that is executed in our GitHub "Build Images"
"pull request target" to make sure

## Decision

The decision of our use of GitHub images is to utilise "Pull Request Workflow" to build the shared image,
but to make sure that the following rules are in-place:

1) We always use `persist-credentials: false` in all GitHub Action checkouts, to prevent unauthorized pushes

>    to our repository

Reviewer 2: Can this be enforced? Should we implement some kind of verification for this? (rather not relay on remembering)

Author: That's a good point. We could make a pre-commit check for it likely.

Author: https://github.com/apache/airflow/pull/20430

Author: PR ready @eladkal :)

Reviewer 2: thanks!

   * scripts/ci
   * dev/
   All the other sources are taken from the PR, but those two folders, during the "Build image" workflow
   are overwritten by the `main` version of the scripts. This means that it is safe to execute those
   scripts in the "Build Image" workflow.

4) All the other code coming from the PR can only be executed inside the docker container started by the
   `scripts/ci` or `dev` scripts. The docker containers should not have any volumes mounted from
   the host that will enable them to read or modify values, environment variables that are present in the
   Host CI environment.

5) The "docker build" commands automatically execute Dockerfile commands inside such a container, so there
   is no risk that sensitive information from the host will be passed to them.

6) In case any information is needed from the "sources" of Airflow (such as name of the current branch or
   version of airflow) it should be extracted by parsing of the incoming scripts but not executing them. Under
   any circumstances any of the scripts coming from the outside of `scripts/ci` and `dev` should be

>    executed on the host during the image building process.

Reviewer: Under any circumstances any of the scripts coming from the outside of `scripts/ci` and `dev` should be
   executed on the host during the image building process.

Is the above line correct?

Author: Yep. This is advanced security stuff for our 'build' jobs. We really need to make sure that we only execute anything in the build.yml that is coming from one of those two folders only. Because all the rest can be modified by the users making PR and they might get access to stuff we do not want them to.

What we do in our workflows, we make sure that those two folders (for now only scripts/ci) are not coming from the PR of the user but from 'main' branch of our repository

Reviewer: @potiuk Under any circumstances any of the scripts coming from the outside of scripts/ci and dev should **not** be executed on the host during the image building process.
Am i right? Not is missing, which will mean you allow any scripts to be executed
